






















# sand_align_master(1)

## NAME
**sand_align_master** - align candidate sequences in parallel

## SYNOPSIS
**sand_align_master [options] sand_align_kernel candidates.cand sequences.cfa overlaps.ovl**

## DESCRIPTION

**sand_align_master** is the second step in the SAND assembler.
It reads in a list of sequences and a list of candidate pairs
to consider, generated by [sand_filter_master(1)](sand_filter_master.md).
It then performs all of the comparisons and produces a list
of overlaps (in OVL format) that exceed a quality threshhold.

This program uses the Work Queue system to distributed tasks
among processors.  After starting **sand_align_master**,
you must start a number of [work_queue_worker(1)](work_queue_worker.md) processes
on remote machines.  The workers will then connect back to the
master process and begin executing tasks.  The actual alignments
are performed by [sand_align_kernel(1)](sand_align_kernel.md) on each machine.

## OPTIONS


- **-p** _&lt;port&gt;_<br />Port number for work queue master to listen on. (default: 9123)
- **-n** _&lt;number&gt;_<br />Maximum number of candidates per task. (default is 10000)
- **-e** _&lt;args&gt;_<br />Extra arguments to pass to the alignment program.
- **-d** _&lt;subsystem&gt;_<br />Enable debugging for this subsystem. (Try **-d all** to start.)
- **-F** _&lt;mult&gt;_<br />Work Queue fast abort multiplier.(default is 10.)
- **-Z** _&lt;file&gt;_<br />Select port at random and write it out to this file.
- **-o** _&lt;file&gt;_<br />Send debugging to this file.
- **-v**<br />Show version string.
- **-h**<br />Show help text.


## EXIT STATUS
On success, returns zero.  On failure, returns non-zero.

## EXAMPLES

Suppose that you begin with a compressed FASTA file (**mydata.cfa**)
and a list of candidate reads (**mydata.cand**) generated by [sand_filter_master(1)](sand_filter_master.md).
First, start a single [work_queue_worker(1)](work_queue_worker.md) process in the background.
Then, invoke [sand_align_master()](sand_align_master.md) as follows:

```
% work_queue_worker localhost 9123 &
% sand_align_master sand_align_kernel mydata.cand mydata.cfa mydata.ovl
```

To speed up the process, run more [work_queue_worker()](work_queue_worker.md) processes
on other machines, or use [condor_submit_workers(1)](condor_submit_workers.md) or [uge_submit_workers(1)](uge_submit_workers.md) to start hundreds of workers in your local batch system.

## COPYRIGHT

The Cooperative Computing Tools are Copyright (C) 2022 The University of Notre Dame.  This software is distributed under the GNU General Public License.  See the file COPYING for details.

## SEE ALSO


- [Cooperative Computing Tools Documentation]("../index.html")
- [SAND User Manual]("../sand.html")
- [sand_filter_master(1)](sand_filter_master.md)  [sand_filter_kernel(1)](sand_filter_kernel.md)  [sand_align_master(1)](sand_align_master.md)  [sand_align_kernel(1)](sand_align_kernel.md)  [sand_compress_reads(1)](sand_compress_reads.md)  [sand_uncompress_reads(1)](sand_uncompress_reads.md)  [work_queue_worker(1)](work_queue_worker.md)


CCTools
