






















# vine_plot_performance(1)

## NAME
**vine_plot_performance** - plots TaskVine performance logs.

## SYNOPSIS
**vine_plot_performance [options] vine-perf-log**

## DESCRIPTION

**vine_plot_performance** is a script to plot some of the statistics from a
TaskVine log, as generated by **vine_enable_perf_log** from the C API, or by
**q.enable_perf_log** from the Python API.

**vine_plot_performance** generates four plots, all with **timestamp** as
the independent variable:

**time**:
    timestamp, total_send_time, total_receive_time, total_transfer_time, and total_manager_time. (The last two generated by the script, not in the log.)

**time-log**:
    log-scale version of **times**, plus total_execute_time.

**tasks**:
    total_tasks_waiting, total_tasks_running, total_workers_connected, total_workers_busy, and total_cores

**tasks-log**:
    log-scale version of **tasks**, plus total_complete_tasks.

## OPTIONS

- **-o** _&lt;prefix-output&gt;_<br />Generate prefix-output.{time,time-log,tasks,tasks-log}._&lt;output-format&gt;_. Default is _&lt;work-queue-log&gt;_.
- **-o** _&lt;prefix-output&gt;_<br />Generate prefix-output.{time,time-log,tasks,tasks-log}._&lt;output-format&gt;_. Default is _&lt;work-queue-log&gt;_.
- **-r** _&lt;range&gt;_<br />Range of time to plot, in time units (see -u) from the start of execution. Of the form: min:max, min:, or :max.
- **-T** _&lt;output-format&gt;_<br />Set output format. Default is svg.
- **-u** _&lt;time-unit&gt;_<br />Time scale to output. One of s,m,h or d, for seconds, minutes (default), hours or days.
- **-h**<br />Show help text.


## EXAMPLES

General use:

```
% vine_plot_performance mylog
% ls mylog*.png
mylog.tasks.png mylog.tasks-log.png mylog.time.png mylog.time-log.png
```

Plot up to the eleventh hour:

```
% vine_plot_performance -u h -r :11 mylog

```
Generate script text:

## BUGS

## COPYRIGHT

The Cooperative Computing Tools are Copyright (C) 2022 The University of Notre Dame.  This software is distributed under the GNU General Public License.  See the file COPYING for details.

CCTools
