






















# work_queue_graph_workers(1)

## NAME
**work_queue_graph_workers** - visualize Work Queue transaction logs

## SYNOPSIS
**work_queue_graph_workers [-h] [-g | -t | -w] [-o outfile] work-queue-log**

## DESCRIPTION

**work_queue_graph_workers** is a script to visualize the output of Work
Queue transaction logs, as generated by **work_queue_specify_log** from the C
and Perl Work Queue APIs, or by **q.specify_log** from the Python Work Queue
API. It assumes the avalability of Python **bokeh** package.

**work_queue_graph_workers** supports three interactive visualization modes,
all with **timestamp** as the independent variable, from which the timestamp
of the first tasks transfer is subtracted, so that the horizontal axis starts
at 0. The tasks are colored based on category. 

## OPTIONS

- **-h**<br />Show help text.
- **-g**<br />Generate visualization for the life time of all tasks, with
file transfer times included. Tasks are sorted along the vertical axis based on
the time at which file transfer starts.
- **-t**<br />Generate visualization for lifetime of tasks per worker,
file transfer time included, each worker corresponds to a subplot. Note that
the slots assignment is merely for visualization and does not correspond to the
actual cores.)
- **-w**<br />Generate visualization for the lifetime of all workers,
colored based on working or idling.
- **-o** _&lt;outfile&gt;_<br />Specify the output path for the generated HTML file.
The default is **<work-queue-log>.html**.


## COPYRIGHT

The Cooperative Computing Tools are Copyright (C) 2005-2022 The University of Notre Dame.  This software is distributed under the GNU General Public License.  See the file COPYING for details.

CCTools

